OSDOCS-11211 Creating OCP 4.17 Release Notes file (#78469)
openshift/openshift-docs: release_notes/ocp-4-17-release-notes.adoc

Built on {op-system-base-full} and Kubernetes, {product-title} provides a more secure and scalable multitenant operating system for today's enterprise-class applications, while delivering integrated application runtimes and libraries. {product-title} enables organizations to meet security, privacy, compliance, and governance requirements.

[id="ocp-4-17-about-this-release_{context}"]
== About this release

// TODO: Update with the relevant information closer to release.
{product-title} (link:https://access.redhat.com/errata/RHSA-2024:XXXX[RHSA-2024:XXXX]) is now available. This release uses link:https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/CHANGELOG/CHANGELOG-1.29.md[Kubernetes 1.29] with CRI-O runtime. New features, changes, and known issues that pertain to {product-title} {product-version} are included in this topic.

{product-title} {product-version} clusters are available at https://console.redhat.com/openshift. With the {cluster-manager-first} application for {product-title}, you can deploy {product-title} clusters to either on-premises or cloud environments.

// Double check OP system versions

> {product-title} {product-version} is supported on {op-system-base-full} 8.8-8.10, and on {op-system-first} 9.4.

Author: Reluctant to change this since it took a while to get agreement on the phrasing.

//Removed the note per https://issues.redhat.com/browse/GRPA-3517

//Even-numbered release lifecycle verbiage
//Starting from {product-title} 4.14, the Extended Update Support (EUS) phase for even-numbered releases increases the total available lifecycle to 24 months on all supported architectures, including `x86_64`, 64-bit ARM (`aarch64`), {ibm-power-name} (`ppc64le`), and {ibm-z-name} (`s390x`) architectures.
//Beyond this, Red{nbsp}Hat also offers a 12-month additional EUS add-on, denoted as _Additional EUS Term 2_, that extends the total available lifecycle from 24 months to 36 months. The Additional EUS Term 2 is available on all architecture variants of {product-title}.

//Odd-numbered release lifecycle verbiage
The support lifecycle for odd-numbered releases, such as {product-title} 4.15, on all supported architectures, including `x86_64`, 64-bit ARM (`aarch64`), {ibm-power-name} (`ppc64le`), and {ibm-z-name} (`s390x`) architectures is 18 months.
For more information about support for all versions, see the link:https://access.redhat.com/support/policy/updates/openshift[Red Hat {product-title} Life Cycle Policy].

> Commencing with the {product-version} release, Red{nbsp}Hat is simplifying the administration and management of Red{nbsp}Hat shipped cluster Operators with the introduction of three new life cycle classifications; Platform Aligned, Platform Agnostic, and Rolling Stream. These life cycle classifications provide additional ease and transparency for cluster administrators to understand the life cycle policies of each Operator and form cluster maintenance and upgrade plans with predictable support boundaries. For more information, see link:https://access.redhat.com/webassets/avalon/j/includes/session/scribe/?redirectTo=https%3A%2F%2Faccess.redhat.com%2Fsupport%2Fpolicy%2Fupdates%2Fopenshift_operators[OpenShift Operator Life Cycles].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Commencing with the {product-version} release, Red{nbsp}Hat is simplifying the administration and management of Red{nbsp}Hat shipped cluster Operators with the introduction of the three new life cycle classifications as follows:

* Platform Aligned
* Platform Agnostic
* Rolling Stream

These life cycle classifications provide additional ease and transparency for cluster administrators to understand the life cycle policies of each Operator, and form cluster maintenance and upgrade plans with predictable support boundaries. For more information, see link:https://access.redhat.com/webassets/avalon/j/includes/session/scribe/?redirectTo=https%3A%2F%2Faccess.redhat.com%2Fsupport%2Fpolicy%2Fupdates%2Fopenshift_operators[OpenShift Operator Life Cycles].
```

For more information about the NIST validation program, see link:https://csrc.nist.gov/Projects/cryptographic-module-validation-program/validated-modules[Cryptographic Module Validation Program]. For the latest NIST status for the individual versions of {op-system-base} cryptographic libraries that have been submitted for validation, see link:https://access.redhat.com/articles/2918071#fips-140-2-and-fips-140-3-2[Compliance Activities and Government Standards].

[id="ocp-4-17-add-on-support-status_{context}"]
== {product-title} layered and dependent component support and compatibility

The scope of support for layered and dependent components of {product-title} changes independently of the {product-title} version. To determine the current support status and compatibility for an add-on, refer to its release notes. For more information, see the link:https://access.redhat.com/support/policy/updates/openshift[Red Hat {product-title} Life Cycle Policy].

[id="ocp-4-17-new-features-and-enhancements_{context}"]
== New features and enhancements

> This release adds improvements related to the following components and concepts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This release adds improvements related to the following components and concepts:
```

[id="ocp-4-17-rhcos_{context}"]
=== {op-system-first}

[id="ocp-4-17-installation-and-update_{context}"]
=== Installation and update

[id="ocp-4-17-postinstallation-configuration_{context}"]
=== Postinstallation configuration

[id="ocp-4-17-web-console_{context}"]
=== Web console

> [id="ocp-4-16-web-console-language"]

Reviewer 2: You can remove this one

==== Language support for French and Spansih
With this release, French and Spanish are supported in the web console. You can update the language in the web console from the *Language* list on the *User Preferences* page.

> [id="ocp-4-16-patternfly4-deprecated"]

Reviewer 2: you can remove this one too

|Bridge
|Supported
|Supported

|Host-device
|Supported
|Supported

|IPAM
|Supported
|Supported

|IPVLAN
|Supported
|Supported
|====

.CSI Volumes
[cols="2,1,1",options="header"]
|====
|Feature |{ibm-power-name} |{ibm-z-name} and {ibm-linuxone-name}

|Cloning
|Supported
|Supported

|Expansion
|Supported
|Supported

|Snapshot
|Supported
|Supported
|====

[id="ocp-4-17-auth_{context}"]
=== Authentication and authorization

[id="ocp-4-17-networking_{context}"]
=== Networking

[id="ocp-4-17-registry"]
=== Registry

[id="ocp-4-17-storage_{context}"]
=== Storage

[id="ocp-4-17-oci"]
=== {oci-first}

[id="ocp-4-17-oci_{context}"]
=== Oracle(R) Cloud Infrastructure

[id="ocp-4-17-olm_{context}"]
=== Operator lifecycle

[id="ocp-4-17-osdk_{context}"]
=== Operator development

[id="ocp-4-17-builds_{context}"]
=== Builds

[id="ocp-4-17-machine-config-operator_{context}"]
=== Machine Config Operator

[id="ocp-4-17-machine-management_{context}"]
=== Machine management

[id="ocp-4-17-nodes_{context}"]
=== Nodes

[id="ocp-4-17-monitoring_{context}"]
=== Monitoring

[id="ocp-4-17-network-observability-1-6_{context}"]
=== Network Observability Operator

> The Network Observability Operator releases updates independently from the {product-title} minor version release stream. Updates are available through a single, Rolling Stream which is supported on all currently supported versions of {product-title} 4. Information regarding new features, enhancements, and bug fixes for the Network Observability Operator is found in the xref:../observability/network_observability/network-observability-operator-release-notes.adoc#network-observability-rn[Network Observability release notes].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Network Observability Operator releases updates independently from the {product-title} minor version release stream. Updates are available through a single Rolling Stream supported on all currently supported versions of {product-title} 4. For information regarding new features, enhancements, and bug fixes for the Network Observability Operator, see the xref:../observability/network_observability/network-observability-operator-release-notes.adoc#network-observability-rn[Network Observability release notes].
```

[id="ocp-4-17-scalability-and-performance_{context}"]
=== Scalability and performance

[id="ocp-4-17-edge-computing_{context}"]
=== Edge computing

[id="ocp-4-17-hcp_{context}"]
=== Hosted control planes

[id="ocp-4-17-insights-operator_{context}"]
=== Insights Operator

[id="ocp-4-17-etcd-certificates_{context}"]
=== Security

> [id="ocp-4-16-notable-technical-changes_{context}"]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[id="ocp-4-17-notable-technical-changes_{context}"]
```

== Notable technical changes

> {product-title} {product-version} introduces the following notable technical changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{product-title} {product-version} introduces the following notable technical changes:
```

// Note: use [discrete] for these sub-headings.
// example sub-heading below:
//[discrete]

> //[id="ocp-4-16-cluster-cloud-controller-manager-operator"]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
//[id="ocp-4-17-cluster-cloud-controller-manager-operator"]
```

//=== Cloud controller managers for additional cloud providers
//

> [id="ocp-4-16-deprecated-removed-features_{context}"]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[id="ocp-4-17-deprecated-removed-features_{context}"]
```

== Deprecated and removed features

Some features available in previous releases have been deprecated or removed.

> Deprecated functionality is still included in {product-title} and continues to be supported; however, it will be removed in a future release of this product and is not recommended for new deployments. For the most recent list of major functionality deprecated and removed within {product-title} {product-version}, refer to the table below. Additional details for more functionality that has been deprecated and removed are listed after the table.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Deprecated functionality is still included in {product-title} and continues to be supported. However, it will be removed in a future release of this product. Avoid using the deprecated functionality for new deployments. For the most recent list of major functionality deprecated and removed within {product-title} {product-version}, refer to the table below. Additional details for more functionality that has been deprecated and removed are listed after the table.
```
As per RH SSG, avoid the verb recommend. Refer to https://redhat-documentation.github.io/supplementary-style-guide/#recommend

Author: This has been the phrasing in the release notes for a long time so I'm going to leave it for consistency.

In the following tables, features are marked with the following statuses:

* _General Availability_
* _Deprecated_
* _Removed_

[discrete]

> [id="ocp-4-16-operators-dep-rem_{context}"]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
[id="ocp-4-17-operators-dep-rem_{context}"]
```

|General Availability
|Deprecated
|Deprecated

|Scaffolding tools for Go-based Operator projects
|General Availability
|Deprecated
|Deprecated

|Scaffolding tools for Hybrid Helm-based Operator projects
|Technology Preview
|Deprecated
|Deprecated

|Scaffolding tools for Java-based Operator projects
|Technology Preview
|Deprecated
|Deprecated

|Platform Operators
|Technology Preview
|Removed
|Removed

|Plain bundles
|Technology Preview
|Removed
|Removed

|SQLite database format for Operator catalogs
|Deprecated
|Deprecated
|Deprecated
|====

[discrete]
[id="ocp-4-17-images-dep-rem_{context}"]
=== Images deprecated and removed features

.Cluster Samples Operator deprecated and removed tracker
[cols="4,1,1,1",options="header"]
|====
|Feature |4.15 |4.16 |4.17

|Cluster Samples Operator
|General Availability
|Deprecated
|Deprecated

|====

[discrete]
[id="ocp-4-17-monitoring-dep-rem_{context}"]
=== Monitoring deprecated and removed features

.Monitoring deprecated and removed tracker
[cols="4,1,1,1",options="header"]
|====
|Feature |4.15 |4.16 |4.17

|`dedicatedServiceMonitors` setting that enables dedicated service monitors for core platform monitoring
|Deprecated
|Removed
|Removed

> |`prometheus-adapter` component that queries resource metrics from Prometheus and exposes them in the metrics API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
|`prometheus-adapter` component that queries resource metrics from Prometheus and exposes them in the metrics API
```
To maintain consistency with the previous entry
